For being here.
We'll let you all get settled
and then we'll get set up into, uh,
public, public session.
Well, welcome everyone.
We are here, uh, to hear from the minister on the education
and training system, reform Amendment Bill.
Um, we've had all of our public hearings already. Mm-hmm.
Um, and so we are now to hear from you minister, um,
brief us on, on the bill.
Um, and the half an hour we have is your time.
Uh, does include time for questions over to you, uh,
to use that time as you wish.
And, um, we'll pass over to you now. Thank
You. Or can I just start by
saying welcome back?
Thank you. It's good to have you back.
Um, and Carl did a, a wonderful job, um, very much.
And I guess while we're all here, is for the reason
that you were away Yeah.
To, uh, improve our education system
and make sure all our kids live up to their,
their fullest potential, um, through the education system.
Um, so thank you very much for your hard work on this.
It's really actually quite interesting doing this the other
way round rather than coming in
before submissions being able to come in after.
Um, so that I have a really good idea.
So maybe it's something to think about for the future.
'cause I actually think this has been, uh,
probably slightly better in my view.
Thanks feedback, but save that up to, um, you, uh,
there are a number of changes in this bill,
but overall, if we helicopter up, it is about, uh, ensuring,
as I said earlier, that we are raising achievement
for our children.
That we are adding more accountability into the system.
Uh, and some of the changes are just good health
of a regulatory, uh, system as well.
So there's a number of changes.
Um, I think I'll start with probably the two changes
that you probably had most of the feedback on.
Um, I'll start with the teaching council,
because that's probably the one you had,
you did have quite a bit of feedback on.
I just start with a little bit of background on this.
One of my priority areas, of course, is to, uh,
develop the workforce of the future.
And one of the biggest concerns from the sector.
Uh, and the first thing that principals
and teachers usually speak to me about is the quality
of initial teacher education.
Uh, and that their feeling is that their experiences, that
that is not where it needs to be.
And that over time, the quality of the graduates coming
through is, uh, uh, you know, uh, decreasing over time.
Now that, uh, feeling is replicated in the evidence
that we've received and the reports that have been done, uh,
firstly by the Education Review Office, uh, where 60%
of principals report their new teachers are under prepared,
uh, primary school teachers report not being prepared
to teach all subjects.
Uh, and that 50% of new teachers, only 50%, found
that the ITE was effective, where almost 30% described it
as ineffective, and they felt unprepared for teaching.
So there's that.
There's the Rural Society Math Report that said that 45%
of teachers felt, uh,
that they were only moderately confident at teaching any
strand of mathematics in year four.
Uh, and then we've also got the findings from the TELUS
report as background, um,
an overall decrease in the proportion of recent graduates
who felt prepared since the last TELUS report.
Under half of teachers with less than five years
of experience reported feeling prepared for most aspects
of teaching well below the OECD average.
And so with that, the change that we have made on the back
of the Rural Society Math Report was requiring, of course,
level two mathematics for,
or equivalent for ITE,
which we're working through at the moment.
And it's been, uh, implemented.
So that is the, the, the backdrop.
The reality is that the government holds no levers
to make any changes to ITE.
We, I cannot, as the minister currently,
I don't hold any powers
or anything to be able to improve the, uh, the, uh,
initial teacher education programs, uh, as they exist.
So the, uh, proposals, uh, in this, keeping
that in mind, the, the key proposal, uh, is to ensure
that we do have a letter to grip this up as teachers
that ask us to do and have higher expectations
on initial teacher education.
Uh, and that is to set the standards required
for initial teacher education, move
that from the teaching council currently into the Ministry
of Education, uh,
and, uh, doing what they would normally do, which is
to consult with the sector, uh, of course, uh,
but to set much higher standards.
Now, when I have met with principals,
and if they're watching and teachers, I said to them,
when this moment arrives and this bill is
before the house, remember the
conversation I'm having with you now.
I don't hold any levers to improve ITE.
You are asking me to help you improve initial teacher
education to set teachers up for success.
This is what we're going to do, grip it up
and have much, uh, stronger settings to ensure that, uh,
ITA, uh, is improved.
The second part of the, of this is also a balancing act, uh,
to strengthen the, uh, legislative require powers
of the teaching council, on the other hand, to monitor, uh,
the, uh, ITT sector against the standards that we set.
So it is really good regulatory health of the system to have
standard setting and monitoring functions
and approval functions sitting in d in different,
sitting in different places.
Uh, and you see us doing
that throughout the education system,
trying to separate those out.
That healthy tension is very important.
Uh, so on the one hand,
removing the standard setting function on the others,
on the other hand, allowing the teaching council to have,
uh, more powers to require information from ITE providers,
uh, to explicitly set conditions on approvals, uh,
and ability to, to revoke approvals as well,
which is powers they have not had before.
So it's a, a balancing.
Um, another key aspect, of course, is the, uh,
that we are removing the standard setting function, uh,
of the, uh, teacher, uh, registration guidelines
and setting that inside the ministry as well.
Of course, same goes for when they're set to be, uh,
requiring them to work with the sector
and consultation to create those.
But they are another really key, important lever
to improve initial teacher education.
If those are strengthened, it's going to mean
that ITE providers have to lift their game in order
to get their students registered against really robust
standards, including things like, uh, you know,
understanding the curriculum material.
Because all of the things we are seeing is
that teachers are not prepared to teach maths.
They're not prepared to teach English.
They're not prepared to teach technology.
So we can see that there is a disconnect between
a good understanding of the curriculum, uh,
and being the requirement to become registered as a teacher.
So if we are, we grip that up as well, uh,
and make sure we're setting high standards,
the IT providers are going to have to meet those standards,
otherwise their graduates are not gonna be able
to get registered as teachers.
These are two core pieces of, uh,
or two core levers for us
to improve initial teacher education, which is
what the sector have been calling for.
Um, those are, uh, regulatory parts.
The second part of the changes to the teaching council,
and I, you will have seen the story in the paper today,
and I provided, um, you with a copy
of the Debbie Francis report.
I've not been able to talk about this obviously
before now, um, interesting timing.
But it is a extraordinarily
serious report, uh, that has
very strong implications.
Essentially, I sat down with the PSC at the end
of last year, the Public Service Commission, and
before I received the report.
And they, their words to me were
that the teaching Council did not view themself as a
child protection agency or a regulatory body.
And it was, uh, DP Francis' findings,
which are very concerning.
That they're more concerned with raising the status
of the profession and being friends
with the profession than their regulatory duty
of protecting children
and ensuring that teachers are meeting certain standards.
Those are very, very serious allegations and findings.
And, uh, I know that there will be, uh,
there will be more to come from this.
I am taking further advice from the ministry on,
on future policy settings now that this report is out,
because obviously these changes I propose in this bill were
made before, well before we had this report.
I don't think anyone in the sector will be surprised
at this report because the feedback
that I've had from principals across the country
and the anecdotal stories they tell me, uh, will mean
that they, they're not surprised by this.
And actually, if you want to raise the status
of the profession, you need to make sure
that teachers are meeting a standard
and that it is being done in a robust way.
So part of this bill, uh, is about, uh,
making sure that the teaching council are sticking
to their core duty, which is what the sector expect
of registering teachers and holding them to that standard.
And, uh, and also being a child protection agency.
So we're removing some of the peripheral stuff that they do,
uh, raising the status of the profession, some
of their leadership functions, their best practice evidence,
research pieces, which actually sit in lots
of other different places so that they can
focus on what they need to do.
And currently, what they are not doing,
which I'm very, very concerned about.
There are a number of other reports that are due out that,
um, the PSC and the Teaching Council are undertaking.
Mm-hmm. Um, and those will be out in due course as well.
But they all together will tell, uh, the story of why,
uh, we need to make sure,
or child protection reasons, we need to grip this up.
So those are the changes to the teaching council.
Uh, I just move into the other part, uh, which will,
I think is the, probably the other area that's the most, uh,
interest to the
submitters, and that's around the curriculum.
Uh, obviously one other, one
of my key areas is curriculum reform,
to make sure we have a world leading year
by year knowledge rich internationally best practice
curriculum that is sequenced, carefully sequenced.
Um, our message, the sector has always been,
this is here to stay.
What we've seen in the past is, uh,
through curriculum statements,
which have always been a thing,
curriculum statements have been around since the nineties,
since tomorrow's schools where, uh, the, uh,
minister has the ability to issue a curriculum statement.
Uh, what we've found is
that every 20 years, well,
so far there's been this homeless bolus change,
which is disruptive to the sector.
I acknowledge that where every curriculum area
is completely revamped.
'cause we haven't done anything in 20 years.
The world's shifted, topics have shifted,
information's shifted.
And, uh, we do this whole bolus change
of every area, and it is disruptive.
International best practice shows that a regular cadence of,
uh, small changes over time.
So you might see English, for example,
every five years sits on a regular cadence
of review sector feedback.
How are things going? What does
international best practice say?
What do the experts say?
What are the things we can tweak and change?
Uh, so you get this ongoing cadence
of small changes rather than a, you know, uh, uh,
a wholesale change every 20 years, which is disruptive.
And so the message is very clearly
that these changes are here to stay.
We do not wanna be disruptive.
Um, and, uh, we are getting in line
with international best practice in terms of those changes.
Uh, so there's no new power, uh,
around issuing a curriculum statement.
That's just the way it's always been.
But we are also introducing, uh, which is currently
what we do, 'cause it's best practice,
but it's not in, uh, legislation to make sure
that the minister has to give regard to the Ministry
of Education's advice and the advice of experts
and international best practice,
and a range of other things, which is
currently not in the legislation.
So, um, that's so relevant.
Evidence from new developments
and educational research, international best practice
information about the educational achievements.
All these things need to be taken into account,
which is currently what we are doing, uh, is
because it is best practice,
but we think it should be, uh, from the legislation.
Yep. So those are the two main things.
Um, of course, we are, as you know, uh,
moving the functions from the, uh,
property department into a, um, uh, an entity,
a crown entity, because we want to continue
and improve, uh, the value for money
that we're already receiving
and have, uh, there's experts, uh,
who will sit on the board
and run, uh, the property agency to make sure
that we continue in that way.
We want to make sure that we're,
we have better communications with schools
that we are getting on time, on budget, uh,
and ensuring that, you know, that all those claims
that the ministry keep getting taken for a ride
because contractors see the ministry coming.
Mm-hmm. And, you know, look at us
and Lee, uh, to drive that down.
And to be fair to the ministry, over the last two years,
we have done an extraordinarily good job of,
of getting good value for money.
And I'll just mention the one case of the school I opened,
uh, two days ago in, uh, Flatbush South, uh,
that was delivered for $41 million for 700 students.
Uh, when we received, when I became the minister, um,
we'd already spent with the, you know,
previous governments had spent $5 million on a plan
to spend $76 million for 600 students.
Uh, we delivered state of the art beautiful classroom,
three story block, absolutely beautiful
for 41 million for 700 students.
That's what we can do, uh, when we, uh, really, uh,
you know, have a, our eye on the ball.
And we will do that more so with a, uh, an agency.
Um, there are some other pieces around.
I, I can, I can answer. I'm happy to open up to questions
because, uh, there are a number of other things around, uh,
education review office, uh, uh,
and also making sure that schools are required to do PS
of pearls and terms, those international studies.
Uh, and a number of other things the committee might like
to, to ask me questions on.
But I think the main, those were the two main things
that I picked up out this, um, uh,
the feedback that you had received. So,
And you are right, minister too, just to, um,
point out your comment about the MOE advice
or taking MOE advice
and advice of experts in that curriculum change.
We had heard a lot of people's concerns on that.
So thank you for clarifying, um,
because that's really helpful.
Um, can I just, to the committee, um, in the interest
of time and getting across the committee, um,
one question at a time, supplementaries through me,
but if there's something that we haven't covered, minister,
that you think we might have that you want
to touch on at the end, I'll just check in
and see if there's anything else.
Yeah. Can I just make one last comment? I forgot.
Go for it. No, that's problem. I just received a,
a letter from the Chief Victims
advisor around the teaching council.
Mm-hmm. And I just wanna read you this point that they wrote
to me just to, this backs up DB Francis.
They say their experience when complaining
and assisting survivors
with the teaching council process has reinforced for me
that they view themselves as an organization to support
and protect teachers as opposed
to the important regulatory function
that they are charged with.
So I just wanna make the point that this is
not just Debbie Francis' review,
but, um, much further than that. Thank
You. So my first question is
from Willow, Jean, then Lawrence,
then Carl, and then I'll check back in.
Thank you for appearing today.
Uh, given that you have listened to the evidence
that has been presented to our select committee,
does it concern you that there are a significant number
who are opposing your systems reform bill?
Uh, including many professional, uh,
organizations from the educational sector?
Which parts in particular?
Because I think I've probably gone through some
of the reasons for that.
I mean, I know that a lot of submitters had concerns
around the teaching council, and I think I've outlined
why we need to make those changes.
I think it's pretty clear, uh,
and around the curriculum changes.
I think it's also very clear
that this is about a regular cadence of change
and that there is no new hours
that have been conferred in terms of, uh,
issuing curriculum statements.
That's been the case since 1989.
In fact, the previous government,
when they issued the curriculum statement around, uh,
80 old New Zealand history did the same
that have the same power.
It's, it's always been a thing.
We are just strengthening it by making sure that we, uh,
have those requirements in place.
So, unless you've got a specific
Yeah, I have, um, so quite slight,
this is an unprecedented ministerial overreach.
This is unfettered political control.
It effectively depro professionalizes the profession.
No other profession would accept such direct political
interference in the standards of practice.
So, sorry. Can I, what do you
Say to those, um, submissions,
which many are representative
of significant numbers within the profession?
Do those, um, submissions concern you?
I think that what de professionalizes, uh,
the sector is what we've had from the teaching Council,
frankly, over the last little while, uh,
because of the fact that they are not fulfilling their duty
as a regulator, as a child protection agency.
And there will be more to come on this.
Very, very serious concerns.
There are another two reports out
that are potentially more serious than this.
Mm. I haven't seen them, uh,
but I understand that they're coming very soon.
So my message to teachers is that you need a body, uh,
that upholds the teaching profession in a way that ensures
that they are properly regulating their members to ensure
that, uh, that teachers who are fit to teach our teaching
and that teachers who are not fit should not be.
And from all accounts, from Debbie Francis' review,
uh, that is not the case.
Uh, and we have to take, uh, you know,
responsibility to make sure that they are doing their job.
Secondly, in terms of setting those, uh, standards
of initial teacher education
and teacher registration, as I've mentioned
before, uh, the, those very same people, no doubt
that are making these comments, are probably the same people
who are also saying
that initial teacher education is not up to standard.
And there is literally nothing I can do.
Which is why I said to the sector, we will grip this up
and remember when I come with this bill,
this conversation that we're having now.
Because if we're going to set high standards for it
and to make sure that they are doing their job and,
and properly setting teachers up for success,
we have to have high standards.
Uh, and there will be a standard setting
function within the ministry.
They will continue to consult with the sector to, uh,
produce those, uh, those standards as you would expect.
But that is the way we are going
to improve initial teacher education,
because if we don't do that, nothing will change.
And we will continue to get these reports from ero,
from Telus, from the rural society that says
that teachers are not prepared and we are letting them down.
Just supplementary on that, you said
that this is something that the sector has been calling for,
particularly around initial teacher education, yet submitter
after submitter said they had not been consulted on
what was proposed in this bill.
So you have not worked with them collaboratively
to develop the response to the issues that they are raising.
Why are you not consulting the sector and the experts,
But the Ministry of Education have
consulted throughout this bill?
They haven't been Here.
Is this is what this committee is here for. Yeah.
We are here to, this is not
Consultation.
Thank you. We just need to hear from the minister. Thanks.
There are very, very few levers that are available to me
to improve initial teacher education.
This is one of the only things that we can do, uh,
in order to improve initial teacher education.
Uh, if there were other things, uh, you know,
we would've done them already.
We don't because of
Other things. Sorry, can I
just stop for a moment?
Just for the sake of hand side.
Can we have one person talking at a time? Thank you.
Uh, and so the, the, the,
the answer is either we continue along the way we are
and we keep failing teachers
and letting them down, which is what we have been doing.
The system has let teachers down, uh,
and that then flows through to student outcomes.
Uh, we want to support teachers
and build the workforce of the future,
but at the moment, we are having to spend taxpayers money,
hundreds of millions of dollars in professional learning
and development year after year
after year to backfill the failures
of initial teacher education.
Sure. And it is still the case
that there are initial teacher education providers
that are not teaching structured literacy
and it is a legal requirement to teach it.
Yeah. So we have to grip this up, right?
These are the levers that we need.
We will do it in consultation.
The ministry will do it in consultation with the sector.
Uh, but if we are going to make a change
and improve student outcomes and fully back teachers
and give them the tools they need, then we have
to set higher expectations.
Can I get the supplementary from Lawrence
and then Shannon, so we can move on
to the next question, just given time?
Yeah. Um, and I think just for your, when it's chair, uh,
I think a lot of my supplementary question also ties into my
primary if I can just ask a few
questions based on the submitters.
Yep. Yeah. Um, thank you so much for coming.
And it's also really good to see you come at the end.
'cause I think, like the chia said, it's a really nice way
of all of us kind of on the same page in terms of
what the submitters have reflected on feedback
to the seller committee as well as you.
I just wanna pick up on what, um, Willo Jean mentioned
before in terms of the initial teacher education
and also the teaching council.
I think both in terms of the report that we saw today,
there is needs to be a balance in terms
of the initial teacher education.
I think no one's denying that.
The question here is that we also heard from submitters says
that correlation is not the same thing as causation.
So even though there are changes that needs to be made,
the question would be why do you think it is necessary?
I also understand your frustration as a,
why do you think it is necessary to change the makeup
of the teaching council
to stack ministerial appointees
greater than elected members? That is
An excellent Question. Um,
because Yeah, yeah. Think that
Some more good question.
If you look at the DB Francis Review
and the, oh, we don't claims that she makes, um,
and I've given it to the chair so she can make it available
to you, um, that the,
uh, I teaching council don't view themselves
as a regulatory body or a child protection agency.
Now for such an, an important body, it is really crucial
to have the skills and experience on the Board of Finance,
uh, and of people who understand governance, who understand
regulatory functions, who understand child protection, uh,
and who have the skills necessary
to be able to keep the teaching councils
and other similar bodies on track.
Now we have a body of 13 members. It's far too many.
Any governance body that is ridiculous amount of people,
it is just unwielding.
And we have not had clearly the skills
of the people on the board.
I have put the, my ministerial appointments on the board,
and they are people with risk
and finance, uh, people who've got experience in, uh,
disciplinary tribunals, regulatory functions, uh,
good governance people, excellent principles
who understand governance.
And, uh, they are the people who have unearthed all of this.
Uh, and it is my, uh,
experience and looking back over time
that we have not had the experience on the board.
That's how we got to this position.
And I'm not prepared to go in these cycles of where, well,
where we have, uh, people on the board who are frankly
voted on by between seven and 9% of teachers.
More than 90%
of teachers don't even vote in these elections.
And we get the same people, uh, again and again and again.
Wonderful principals not disputing that,
but they don't have the skills
and experience we need in order
to make sure we have a proper regulatory body
that upholds child protection duties.
And that is why I'm making this change.
And I don't think anyone reading this report
that would think that that was unreasonable,
I guess the concern just supplementary.
Thank you for that. I guess the concern that we hear
and we hear from the submitter over
and over again is, number one,
the exhaustion from the teaching profession.
And you kind of mentioned some of that as well,
but this idea of the political football that we're seeing
with education now, I guess the question here is
no one stays as a minister forever.
One day you won't be a
minister, there'll be another minister.
Would you be equally happy with another minister making all
of these changes to teaching council to ITE
to curriculum without the kind
of processes that's needed?
Because again, there's a lot of exception clause
also in this bill that allows ministers
to make certain decisions unanimous,
like unilaterally without any form of consultation.
Um, I guess that's a, that's a question for you.
Um, that's not true. I can read you the exact clause.
There's nothing. Sorry. Um,
Lawrence, just, but that's one of my questions.
But I guess, you know, just,
Can I, sorry.
We start with Move on.
There is nothing new in this bill
that gives the minister any
new additional powers of not having to do that.
In fact, the powers in this bill are the exact opposite.
Uh, at the moment. There is no requirement for the minister
to give regard to the experts, the international evidence,
the all of the things that are currently in the bill, um,
in section 90 B, uh, those are new.
We're doing them anyway because it's best practice.
But I'm putting them in there
as additional, uh, requirements.
Um, as I mentioned before,
these did not exist when the previous government wrote the
a o history curriculum.
Uh, or previous governments prior to
that wrote other curriculum areas back in, you know, 2007.
Um, we are putting those in as additional support.
So your claim that there is somehow something, the bill
that gives ministers unfettered power is completely untrue.
There is nothing in there that doesn't already
exist and hasn't existed.
In fact, there are more safeguards.
Final question. Can I just, so, um, I just wanna check,
Shannon, has your supplementary been
answered in, in the number?
Uh, not yet. No. Okay.
'cause I, we will clear those two final
and then I need to move on to other primary questions. So
Lawrence, I guess a final question again, just around
what you said in terms of the ministry, um,
consulting with the sector,
whether it's subject coordination in terms of curriculum,
or whether it's initial teaching education.
I just want to change in terms of,
and this came from ministry's own advice.
There was no collaboration or or consultation.
It is informed that is the verb that is being used.
It is informed. And we've seen reports lately
that the ministry in some
of these decisions has also sidelined expert advice.
And I understand what you mean, that maybe something
that's in this bill has always been the case
and you're just now codifying it.
But I guess the question for you as a minister, Dan,
is hearing from the submitters, what are you going to do
to rebuild that trust and that accountability
and that transparency with the sector?
Because except for one, which is on ECE,
every single submission we've heard has been
a opposing this bill.
Well, I'm, I'm, hopefully some
of the comments I've made today, um,
will put their minds at ease.
Remembering though, that when we,
and I think this is kind of where your question was going.
When we write,
or the ministry writes curriculum areas mm-hmm.
We talk to a range of experts.
There are so many people that get spoken to.
There are heads of department,
there are international experts, there's local experts,
there's professors, there's all sorts of people.
There were people in the ministry who were helping to write,
uh, and everybody has a different view.
Mm-hmm. Now we can't employ everyone's view
because we would have a document
that's a thousand pages long and would never get taught.
Unfortunately, we have
to draw a line in the sand at some point, make a call.
Uh, and we have taken a very different, uh,
tack from the previous government on some
areas of the curriculum.
Uh, and look, there'll be people who disagree with that.
Yeah. And you've probably heard from them. Yep.
But the fact of the matter is there will always be those
people that in the end we have to make a call.
Uh, and you know, they might come and have their say to you,
but I just caution you.
And that there were many other experts that are very happy
that we did listen to that you're not hearing from.
Uh, yeah. But that's just the way of things.
And you know, I, I, you know that, thank you
for their input, but in the end we have to make a call.
Yeah. So just in the interest of moving on,
Shannon, can we make yours?
Yeah. Succinct. Thank you.
Yeah, KDA. Thank you. So we're sort of a stalemate.
I, I accept that you feel limited in your powers currently
and you want to achieve, you know, bit
of change at the other end.
Submissions have been very clear
that this is quite an overreach.
What other options have you been presented with?
Um, how were they considered
and why have you gone particularly with
There are some other things that we are considering.
Yeah, they're not, uh, as the,
the only way that we can, uh, encourage
ITE providers to lift their game is through these standards.
There are some things we can do around the periphery,
like we've done with, uh, ensuring that the students need
to obtain or have an equivalent of level two maths even that
I have been informed is not properly being implemented.
Uh, and so this is the key thing.
I can't go into detail around some of the other things
'cause they're under active consideration.
But again, I can just promise you they are not the things,
the key levers.
If there was something that I could do,
and I think the previous government to be fair,
probably heard the same things,
minister Ens probably heard the same thing.
If there was something we could do that ensured
that the ITE providers lifted their game,
we would have done it.
And we have relied on the teaching council
and their standard settings and they have not gripped it up.
I have provided, uh, my thoughts, uh, to them
on where I think they need to go to grip this up
and to raise standards and expectations on ITE, uh,
and, uh, that, uh, has not happened.
So if we want to do right by teachers
and provide them with the ITE experience,
that sets them up for success.
We have to set higher standards.
But I would like to also say, remembering
that I am also giving the council enhanced powers
that they have asked me for.
Because at the moment, it's kind of a handshake they have
with the IT providers to be able to do anything.
I'm now giving them legislative powers to go,
these are the standards that have been set.
I'm requiring you to give me the information.
You say you're doing structured literacy,
but actually it turns out, oh, you're only actually doing it
for one hour over a year course.
Is that really teaching structured literacy?
So they'll have more powers to go in
to properly look at exactly what's happening in the course,
um, that they have been asking for.
So it is a balance of giving them more power,
but it is regulatory best practice not
to have standard setting and monitoring
and enforcement sitting in the same body.
Uh, and we're doing that with, in, with, uh, the arrow
and ECE functions as well.
Standard setting, sitting with the ministry enforcement
and monitoring and licensing sitting with them.
So it is that healthy tension in the system.
It is best practice
and I understand the concerns of those submitters.
But if we want to raise, uh,
the expectations on initial teacher education,
properly set up our teachers for success,
then we've gotta grip this up
with respect to both sides of the table.
Carl, if you can make it succinct,
I'll give the last question.
Thanks, chair. Uh, minister.
So we've heard a bit about the concern around moving, uh,
property into the New Crown agency.
Um, you've shared an example of the significant saving
by planning these things properly.
Can you just explain for the committee
what the impact on students is gonna be
of there being more money
to spend on property and maintenance? Yeah,
But we are massively behind and have been for decades
and decades in maintenance and role growth.
We've just put together the very first 10 year property plan
in terms of maintenance and growth we've ever had.
So we can clearly see what are the needs over time
and if different budget decisions are made,
what are the key trade offs?
Um, 'cause that is really good transparency in the system.
Um, it, it basically, there will be, uh,
a lot more professionalism of, uh, the entity, a board
of experts who have had between them decades and decades
and decades of experience.
Uh, so you will see us being able
to provide more classrooms, more upgrades, more maintenance,
uh, but also a bit more flexibility.
There are a number of schools that right now,
frankly build classrooms themselves
faster and cheaper than we do.
Uh, so there will be an opportunity for that new fun,
that new entity to be able to take more calculated risks.
But also in terms of small, rural, isolated schools
or other schools that just don't want to deal with property,
how do we bucket those up
and say to them, look, there is a function
that this entity will take on and take that off your hands.
There's a lot of things that they will be able to do, uh,
to make it easier for schools, uh, give more flexibility,
but in the end, drive better value
for money than we're even seeing at the moment.
More efficiency, far better communication, um, with schools,
because that has been a big problem.
What we're trying to get away from is
what we found when we became the government.
There was all these announcements that had been made
and promises and schools were expecting things.
There was no funding, zero funding.
The school that we opened the other day,
there was no funding for.
Um, we announced that funding and budget. It's
True. You could have easily put,
We, we budgeted for in 2024.
As I say, we delivered it 41 million rather, 76. It's not.
And I expect actually that over time we'll be able
to drive that down even more.
So we're getting better value for money.
We're building more classrooms,
we're maintaining more classrooms, uh,
and that that entity will, will take that even further.
Thank you very much, minister,
for making yourself available to us.
Thank you to see you. Uh, I've just got e to look into it.
So she's just following up. Mr.
Not that e can see. I haven't checked my emails though while
I've been doing this, so we'll check after this.
Thank you.